Berlin April 1945
in Hitler's bunker in the center of the German capital
It was obvious to everyone that the fuhrer had lost the war
Hitler would rather die than Surrender and he expected the german people to do the same
But on the 28th of April only two days before his suicide
It'll land of a BBC broadcast that contained devastating news
It has been reported by reuters that unconditional surrender was offered by Himmler to Britain and the United States only
Hitler was beside himself Himmler had betrayed the very foundation of the Nazi State. Loyalty to the Führer
But Himmler's peace offer was only the final act in a story of double-dealing within the third Reich never before told on television
Time Watch reveals how in the later stages of the war both Himmler and Hitler compromised on their ideological beliefs
And how ultimately Himmler was to betray his beloved Führer
At the height of his career Himmler was after Hitler the most powerful man of the third, right?
aged 44 he was head of the SS, and the police
minister of the interior Reichs Commissar for German Nationhood and commander of both the reserve and the home army
Himmler was hardworking and an efficient organizer
But the key to his success was one quality he possessed which Hitler valued above any other
loyalty
When himmler took over the ss. He confided to a party comrade
The SSvwill be an order sworn to the fuhrer for him. I could do anything
Believe me if hitler were to say I should shoot my mother. I would do it and be proud of his confidence
When in World War II the Nazis moved east. Himmler proved just how murderous his loyalty to hitler could be
SS and police units under Himmler's command,
arrested and killed so called enemies among the civilian population, especially the Jews
by 1942
Jews from all over Europe were systematically deported to camps to be either gassed or worked to death
but when Himmler sent Hitler a statistical report about the so called final solution of the Jewish question
He was scrupulously careful in using euphemistic language
The original report described the killing of Jews as special treatment
but in a version for Hitler Himmler ordered it to be replaced by an even blander term
Transport to the East
Himmler knew the fuhrer did not wish to read any explicit reference to the murders
Hitler needed to keep his own image. Detached from
the the killing of women and children in the east and from the
most terrible aspects of this genocide
Hitler was aware that the foot of the German people
Wouldn't be ready for this, so he was still able to free himself up from this
Direct Connection with the murder of the Jews and to leave the dirty work to Himmler who himself said this is a glorious secret
Which we must carry with us to the grave
But as the war drew to a close this policy of secrecy was to change
now hitler and Himmler began to make compromises
with Hitler's knowledge and approval
Himmler gave speeches to party officials and military leaders in which he was surprisingly frank about the genocide
One of these speeches was recorded on the 24th of may in 1944 here at the Adolf Hitler school in Sonthofen
Himmler had composed his speech at Sonthofen carefully
Just before speaking so explicitly about the killing of women and children
he had stated in more general terms that the Jewish question had been solved
A statement that had received the spontaneous approval of his audience a gathering of army generals
the applause hints at why Hitler and Himmler had decided to reveal the supposed secret of the Holocaust
I think the reason behind this was to ensure that certain key groups
Recognized their complicity in the Holocaust Hitler referred on a number of occasions to having
We burnt our boats, and that's a good position to be in you know was we're all in this together
We can't get out of it. It's a sworn community
Himmler's speeches were a reminder that there was no alternative to loyalty
For since the Germans were losing the war loyalty to the Führer was being put to the test everywhere
No more so than in the battle of Kharkov in early 1943
The Germans had just suffered a devastating defeat at Stalingrad
Now the Soviets were about to recapture the Ukrainian city of Kharkov
Hitler ordered the SS Panzer Corps with two Waffen-SS Divisions to defend the city to the last man
The Waffen-SS. Was the military branch of the SS and its soldiers were known for their fighting spirit
More than once Waffen-SS troops had proved their loyalty and it stood fast when the regular German army had wavered
But this time it was different
The SS Panzer Corps faced encirclement by the Red Army
It's commander SS general Paul Hausser asked repeatedly for permission to withdraw
Hausser's SS-Panzer Corps was under the command of field marshal von Manstein of the regular army
Manstein too realized that Hitler's stand fast order would only result in senseless sacrifice
But he wasn't willing to act against a direct order from the Führer
So it was SS general Hausser who had to resolve the conflict between loyalty to the Führer and responsibility for his men
Hitler was furious
But Hausser got away with it his SS Divisions escaped encirclement and were able to counter-attack
Now it was the Soviets turn to be encircled
in fierce house-to-house fighting the SS recaptured Kharkov.
The battle of Kharkov was not only the last great German victory of the war
It was also a turning point. For the first time an SS general had Openly disobeyed Hitler's express orders
The head of the SS began to take liberties too. He started to make ideological compromises
Himmler had built up the SS as a racial elite of an imaginary Aryan master race
In the early years he'd even personally examined the photos of SS applicants for their Germanic appearance
But from 1943 this policy changed radically
With Hitler's reluctant consent
Himmler permitted the enlistment of SS Soldiers who by Nazi Standards were racially inferior.
Here in this to the Nazi theorist unsuitable part of the world.
The first and most curious non-Germanic SS formation was recruited
The name of the division was SS Division Handschar
Almost all of It's soldiers were Bosnian Muslims who even had their own Imams.
The Germans were desperate for soldiers who would die for them and Himmler thought Islam was there for the perfect religion
It educates the men in this division for me and
promises them heaven if they fight and are killed-in-action a very practical and attractive religion for soldiers
Even the policy towards the jews the Nazis most hated enemy was not consistent
These pictures of Bergen-Belsen taken just after its liberation have come to epitomize the horrors of the Holocaust
But when in 1943 Shmuel Huppert was taken with his mother to Bergen-Belsen the conditions there were very different
At that time, it wasn't exactly a concentration camp.
It wasn't a camp where they killed people
The life was in a way
reasonable
reasonable in the sense that we got three blankets, so we weren't cold and
we got
something to eat
It wasn't plenty but we could survive
I can say even that we were once in a week or once in two weeks?
We had the opportunity to wash ourselves, and we didn't work
I learned to play chess in Bergen-Belsen and I play chess still today
but what was most important was the fact that we were together
that I was never separated for my mother
the children were with their mothers which was of course something very unusual
In the situation where Jewish children were first of all
taken from their families and exterminated
In 1943 the inmates of Bergen-Belsen were treated relatively better than other Jews
Because Himmler aimed to exchange them for German nationals in neutral or enemy countries
But this wasn't the only example of pragmatic exemptions from the so-called final solution
According to Himmler's agenda notes for a meeting with Hitler on the 10th of December 1942
one of the topics he discussed with the Führer was the ransom of Jews for foreign currency
Himmler was a compulsive organizer, and typically he'd write Memoranda to himself for future reference
after the meeting with Hitler he dictated
I have asked the Führer about ransoming Jews for hard currency
He has authorized me to approve such cases if they really brought in substantial amounts of foreign money
At a time when the Holocaust had reached its most lethal phase
Hitler and Himmler were prepared to release certain Jews for ransom
But this wasn't just about money
Himmler's agenda notes show that he also planned to use important Jews as hostages
You are fine brothers. I want you each to start a banking business
One to go and open the house in Paris one in Vienna one in London choose the most important centers so
The Nazi's fantasy was the Jews were all interconnected
And so secretly ruled the world
In the latter stages of the war as things got worse and worse the notion that the Jews were so powerful
Meant that in this Nazi demonological view of things that the jews that were in the nazi remit could be useful as hostages
to be used as bargaining counters with the West & Himmler's
Thinking obviously run along these lines not just at this moment
but later on to that the Jews could be useful it could be a bargaining counter a ploy and
This was the way to use them
When in 1944, the Jews of Hungary were deported to Auschwitz.
They were subject to Hitler's most cynical attempt at political blackmail
With Hitler's previous permission to Ransom Jews Himmler made the pretense of proposing to the Western allies a deal
10,000 trucks for the lives of the Hungarian Jews
On the18th of May 1944 two Jewish emissaries left Budapest to contact zionist officials and the Western Allies
On their way to Palestine the two emissaries were detained by the British and sent to Cairo for interrogation by SIME
The Joint Mi5 Mi6 organization in the Middle East
One of the emissaries was Joel Brand from the Jewish rescue committee in Budapest
He said he was to deliver the Jews for trucks proposal
The other emissary was Andor Gross
He was a former smuggler and now agent for both Allied and Axis secret services including the SS
To the surprise of his interrogators Gross claimed that he had a separate secret mission
To propose a meeting between senior SS
intelligence officers and an American or British counterparts in order to negotiate a separate peace between the West and the Nazis.
While the Jews for trucks offer was authorized by Himmler. It's not clear whether Himmler was also behind the Gross mission
But both missions had the same objective
To entice the West into negotiations with the Nazis by using the Hungarian Jews as hostages
Yet Himmler had miscalculated for the Western governments this war was not primarily about the Jews
On the 31st of May 1944
The British War Cabinet committee on the reception and accommodation of refugees chaired by Anthony Eden
met to discuss the Jews for trucks proposal
the minutes of this meeting expressed the concern that
negotiations with the German government might lead to an offer to unload an even greater number
of Jews onto British Hands
Just a few days later Allied forces launched the invasion of Normandy this was not the time for negotiations
Himmler's Jews for trucks proposal was rejected out of hand
But amongst the intercepted German signals sent from the head of Mi6 to Churchill
Time Watch has discovered a document suggesting that in summer 1944
Himmler might have made yet another approach to the Western Allies
one of the signals forwarded to Churchill on the 31st of august 1944 was a telegram from Himmler
A handwritten note by the prime Minister shows that he personally destroyed the telegram
Himmler Telegram kept and destroyed by me
it's not known to whom the intercepted telegram was addressed but out of more than
14,000 decrypts seen by Churchill personally during the war
This is the only one from Himmler and the only one Churchill destroyed
I think it is interesting that the this telegram arrives at a time, when peace
Soundings are in the air. What's in the telegram?
we don't know but that it comes at this time may just be an indicator that himmler is trying to drive a wedge between
the Western Allies and the soviet Union something which the
Nazi Leadership was was very much hoping for and in a sense
Churchill's reaction to Destroy it might well have been therefore to prevent any semblance of this getting out and being
Discussed in any circles whatsoever had been taken seriously?
only a few days after the intercept of the mysterious telegram Himmler discussed with Hitler Peace feelers either to Russia by the
Japanese or to England
But nothing came of it Hitler was against any peace talks as long as Germany was not in the position to dictate the conditions
From this point in the war Himmler's loyalty to hitler began to waver
Unlike Hitler, Himmler was searching for a political solution to the war and this search was to be kept secret
One of the few people who knew about Himmler's double game was the head of SS intelligence Walter Schellenberg
But Himmler faced one major problem. It was unlikely that the West would be willing to negotiate with him
Encouraged by Schellenberg. Himler hoped that by concealing his crimes and with some humanitarian
Gestures he could persuade the Western governments to negotiate with him
The Jews of Theresienstadt were to play a crucial part in this strategy
This Nazi Propaganda film about the Theresienstadt  Ghetto is produced in 1944
Its purpose was to deceive the world that the Jews were being treated well by the Nazis
the truth was that most Theresienstadt inmates were sent to Auschwitz or died of starvation and disease.
Theresienstadt was not a death factory like Auschwitz or Dachau
So Himmler thought it safe to use the Jews of Theresienstadt to create an alibi for himself
Through intermediaries in Switzerland Himmler agreed with the American Union of Orthodox Rabbis to release every two weeks
1,200 Theresienstadt inmates in exchange the following crimes
On the 5th of February 1945 the first train load departed to switzerland
Himmler had made it a condition that the Western press report about the release favorably and this is how Hitler learned of it
from Swiss newspapers
Hitler raged at Himmler.
With German defeat all but inevitable Hitler had changed his mind on ransoming Jews
He strictly forbade any more releases of camp inmates and ordered that any German who helped a Jew escape
be executed
wherever Jews were
They would still remain for Hitler the world enemy number one so as far as he could get hold of the Jews
They were they were doomed in Himmler's point of view
It differed
to the extent that Jews
Were this useful pawn perhaps that could be deployed to gain some advantage
and he was doing this in a sense in a sort of pragmatic fashion to try to
improve his own position in this end phase with the Third Reich because he unlike like Hitler did believe in a
continuation of power one for this particular conflict was ended and was searching for a way to
bring it to an end which would save his own position and save his own
save his own neck as well
With a heavy cold Himmler took refuge in the ss. Hospital at Hohenlychen north of Berlin?
His world was falling apart
Himmler's relationship with Hitler was put under even more strain by the SS chief's military incompetence.
in late January 1945 Hitler had made him the commander of an entire army group and
ordered him to stem the soviet Advance
It was a disaster
Himmler spent far more time in his SS hospital than at his headquarters
Himmler's SS was in trouble with Hitler too after the Soviets had captured Budapest
Hitler ordered an SS counter-offensive on the Hungarian capital
But in face of overwhelming soviet superiority SS veteran Sepp Dietrich and his sixth SS Panzer army retreated
Hitler sent Himmler to strip Dietrich's SS divisions of their arm bands
Including the division which bore the fuhrer's own name the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler
Himmler now made arrangements to take over from Hitler in the event of the Führer's death
whilst he covered himself with Hitler and
ordered that in camps such as Dachau no prisoners must be allowed to fall into Allied hands alive he simultaneously
tried to ingratiate himself with the future victors of the war
He allowed Bergen-Belsen to be surrendered to the British
If himmler hoped that handing over Bergen-Belsen would help his case with the Allies. He couldn't have been more wrong
Himmler had deluded himself about the real conditions in the camp
When the British entered Bergen Belsen it had long lost its special status as a hostage camp
it was overcrowded had
Typhoid and mass starvation were rife
The things in this come are beyond describing
When you actually see them for yourself, you know what you're fighting for here. Pictures in the paper cannot describe it at all
The things they've committed well
nobody would think they were human at all
This morning we burried over five thousand bodies. We don't know who they are
Behind me you can see a pit which will contain another five thousand. There are two others like it in preparation.
All these deaths have been caused by
systemic starvation and typhus and disease which have been spread
Because of the treatment meted out to these poor people by their SS guards and their SS chief.
Despite this misjudgment over Bergen-Belsen
Himmler continued to try and Gain favor with the Nazi 's enemies
Here in the villa of his masseur on the night of the 20th of April 1945
He even met with an emissary of the world Jewish Congress the Swede Norbert Masur
Himmler was desperate that this meeting be kept secret. He knew that in Hitler's eyes, he was committing treason
Himmler agreed with Masur to release 1,000 Jewish women from the Ravensbrück concentration camp
But only on the condition that they be designated as poles not Jews
Hitler was not to know about it
after Masur had left Himmler said to his masseur Felix Caston
If I could have a fresh start. I would do many things differently now, but as a loyal soldier
I had to obey for no state can survive without obedience and discipline
But by now Himmler was no longer a loyal soldier
Only three days after his meeting with Masur, here in this room at the swedish consulate in Lubec
He met Count Folke Bernadotte
from the Red Cross
Himmler Saw in the count a channel to the West and
as he met Bernadotte he was all too well aware of the mental state of his Führer
On the 21st of April 2 days before hen met Bernadotte Hitler had been woken by the noise of shelling
the Soviets had reached the suburbs of Berlin
The Army Group of SS General Felix Steiner
in the North of Berlin was one of Hitler's last hopes he ordered Steiner to launch a suicidal counter-attack
The news of Hitler's Collapse had reached Himmler by the time he met count Bernadotte
Himmler declared that Hitler was quite possibly already dead
He now considered himself free to act and drafted a letter
authorizing Bernadotte to convey an offer of surrender to the Western Allies
It has been reported by Reuters that unconditional surrender was offered by Himmler to Britain and United States only
further that Britain and the United States have replied
Saying that they will not accept unconditional surrender, except on behalf of all of the Allies including Russia.
Himmler had miscalculated once more
Not least because Hitler was still alive and the news of Himmler's secret dealings became public.
Himmler was soon to follow his Fuehrer's example.
On the 23rd of May 1945 he took cyanide in British captivity
This is the house in Lüneburg where Himmler committed suicide.
There he is powerless at last.
Powerless to blackmail to torture or to murder. An ignominious end for the most evil life recorded in history
Himmler's remains lie buried in an unknown grave somewhere in the Lüneburg heath in Northern Germany
Himmler had once said. I can't betray the Führer. Everything I am I owe to him.
But in the end. He did betray his Führer
And died knowing who was loathed and despised by the man he most admired
you